Social media is not just a spoke on the wheel of marketing. It's becoming the way entire
bicycles are built.”-Ryan Lilly
Long gone are the days when announcements were made by a harbinger at a town square.
Today they are made with just the tap of a screen while commuting to work or shopping at a
store.
We are fortunate enough to have been born in an era with multiple platforms to express
ourselves. The horizons of communication have expanded so immensely that information is
shared within a split second no matter which part of the world the sender or the receiver is in.
Therefore we are no longer restricted to being citizens of a particular nation and have been
coined as global citizens thanks to the vast encompassment of social media.
Humanity has just recently been through a pandemic which made it clear how diverse the role of
social media can be. Not only did we rely on it for the news updates, but also it has helped bring
to light and amplify the needs of the people and acted as a beacon of hope in these otherwise
dark times by providing much-needed humor and entertainment. All thanks to the vastness of
social media, distance is no longer a barrier anymore as one can easily communicate with their
kith and kin residing overseas. With the advent of new concepts like reels and spaces, social
media has become the new rostrum for people to showcase their newfound inner creativity
during the lockdown period.
However, everything has two aspects: A positive one and a negative one. Having dealt with the
positive one above it is time for us to ponder upon the negative aspect of social media which
most people tend to overlook given its sheer grasping power.
The most drastic impact that social media has is on mental health. An ample number of surveys
and research studies have considered it to be one of the leading causes of depression and
anxiety in society. A documentary on the popular streaming site Netflix called “The Social
Dilemma” about the ground reality of the social networking platforms from their creators made
waves when it dropped last year. To quote the exact words of Mr.Edward Tufte from the same
documentary: “There are only two industries that call their customers `users`: illegal drugs
and software”. Popular social networking sites such as Facebook, Snapchat, and Instagram
give rise to dopamine-inducing social environments which contribute to social media addiction.
These platforms also generate the same neural circuitry which is caused by gambling and
recreational drugs to keep the consumers from using their products as much as possible.
Studies have shown that the constant influx of notifications in the form of retweets, likes, and
shares from these sites enable the brain’s reward area to trigger the same kind of chemical
reaction as other drugs, such as cocaine.
One of the other detrimental factors is the Lack of privacy. While incidents of data breaches
have alarmed many users and forced them to rethink about the security of their personal
information; the vulnerability to hacking, identity theft, phishing crimes, and other cybercrimes is
also a major concern.
Thankfully due to the increasing awareness and activism, these tech giants have started
incorporating many changes to enhance the user experience and make it a more positive
space. People are also coming to terms with the reality of social media and therefore are taking
necessary steps to keep themselves in check. This was attested in a recent survey conducted
where it was found that almost 71% of respondents took the time to check their advanced
privacy settings when they joined a social media platform.
Therefore it is upon us to use our discretion and be diligent while using social media. We must
remember that it is in our hands to curb what does not contribute to our well-being because
excess use of anything is harmful and applies to social media as well
